Add BibLaTeX tutorial (#30)
oetiker/lshort: book/src/spec.tex

\section{Bibliography}

When writing articles or books concerned with some topic you will often need to
reference other books and articles to point out where some information might be
found. You have already seen this done multiple times throughout this book.
Doing this by hand would be tedious, so \LaTeX{} comes with an option to manage
the bibliographic data of our document. We will describe two approaches to
doing it:
\begin{description}
  \item[\ei{thebibliography} environment] which is suitable for rather small
  bibliographies
  \item[\pai{biblatex} with \hologo{biber}] which is an advanced bibliography

>   managament system that is suitable for professional books and publications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  managament system that is suitable for books and publications with extensive bibliographies. These systems also make it easy to format all bibliography entries in exactly the style required by the publisher.
```

  hand.
  \item There is no logical/structural markup to imply which part of
  bibliographic entry is author, title, journal, etc.
  \item No sorting is performed. If you want the entries to be processed in
  citation order, you have to ensure this manually.
  \item If you want to use different citation style than numeric, you have to
  manually set all the labels.
\end{itemize}
Thus for all projects that contain more than few citations \pai{biblatex} is
strongly recommended.

% For larger projects, you might want to check out the Bib\TeX{}
% program. Bib\TeX{} is included with most \TeX{} distributions. It
% allows you to maintain a bibliographic database and then extract the
% references relevant to things you cited in your paper. The visual
% presentation of Bib\TeX{}-generated bibliographies is based on a style-sheets concept that allows you to create bibliographies following
% a wide range of established designs.

\subsection{\pai{biblatex} with \hologo{biber}}

\subsubsection{Database files}
The \pai*{biblatex} package uses a separate program, \pai*{biber}, for
bibliography management. The bibliographic database is stored in special

> \eei{.bib} files with their own syntax. Single bibliographic entry is of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\eei{.bib} files with their own syntax. A single bibliographic entry is of the
```

form
\begin{lscommand}
\texttt{@}\carg{entry type}\texttt{\{}\carg{marker},\\
\hspace*{1em}\carg{field1}\texttt{ = \{}\carg{value1}\texttt{\}},\\
\hspace*{1em}\carg{field2}\texttt{ = \{}\carg{value2}\texttt{\}},\\
\hspace*{1em}\carg{field3}\texttt{ = \{}\carg{value3}\texttt{\}},\\
\hspace*{3em}\vdots\\
\texttt{\}}
\end{lscommand}

> The exact values allowed are dependent on the bibliographic style chosen, but a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fields required dependend on the bibliography style chosen, but a
```

> reasonable style (including default style of \pai{biblatex}) will accept handle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the default style of \pai{biblatex}) will accept
```

> at least the following \carg{entry type}s:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following \carg{entry type}s:
```

\begin{description}

>   \item[\cargv{article}] for articles from journals or other periodicals. Some
>   of its fields are \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{journaltitle},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item[\cargv{article}] for articles from journals or other periodicals. Important fields are
   are \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{journaltitle},
```

  \cargv{date}, \cargv{url}, \cargv{doi}.

>   \item[\cargv{book}] for single-volume book. Some of its fields are
>   \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{publisher},
>   \cargv{volume}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item[\cargv{book}] for single-volume book. With the fields
  \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{publisher},
  \cargv{volume}.
```

>   \item[\cargv{online}] for accessed online resources. Some of its fields are
>    \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{url}, \cargv{urldate}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item[\cargv{online}] for accessed online resources. With
   \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{url}, \cargv{urldate}.
```

>   \item[\cargv{maual}] for technical documentation. Some of its fields are
>    \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{url}, \cargv{version}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item[\cargv{manual}] for technical documentation. With
   \cargv{author}, \cargv{title}, \cargv{date}, \cargv{url}, \cargv{version}.
```

>   \item[\cargv{misc}] for entries that do not fit any of the predefined
>    categories. Some of its fields are \cargv{author}, \cargv{title},
>    \cargv{date}, \cargv{howpublished}, \cargv{note}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \item[\cargv{misc}] for entries that do not fit any of the predefined
   categories. With \cargv{author}, \cargv{title},
   \cargv{date}, \cargv{howpublished}, \cargv{note}.
```

\end{description}

> Note that the above list is far from exhaustive both in terms of \carg{entry
> type}s and the entries mentioned. For a full list check the \pai{biblatex}
> manual or the style you are using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the above list is far from exhaustive both in terms of \carg{entry
type}s and the field names mentioned. For a full list check the \pai{biblatex}
manual or the style you are using.
```

Each \eei{.bib} file will typically contain multiple entries. See
figure~\ref{fig:bibfile} for an example.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \begin{lined}{\textwidth}
    \verbatiminput{examples/example.bib}
  \end{lined}

>   \caption[An example of bibliography database]{An example of bibliography
>   database for \hologo{biber} (\eei{.bib} file)} \label{fig:bibfile}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \caption[An example of bibliography database]{An example bibliography
  database for \hologo{biber} (\eei{.bib} file)} \label{fig:bibfile}
```

The \pai{biblatex} package must be loaded with the
\begin{lscommand}
  \ci*{usepackage}[options:o ! biblatex:vm]
\end{lscommand}
command. The \carg{options} are comma delimited key value pairs that allow to
customize the behavior of biblatex package. Some of them will be explained
later.

The command
\begin{lscommand}
  \ci*{addbibresource}[options:o ! file:m]
\end{lscommand}
must be put in the preamble. The \carg{file} is the name of the \eei{.bib} file
containing bibliographic entries. You may also specify a remote location here,
but then you must also put \cargv{location=remote} in the \carg{options}.

Finally the
\begin{lscommand}
  \ci*{printbibliography}[options:o]
\end{lscommand}
typesets the loaded bibliography. The \carg{options} may be used to alter the
title or filter the entries included.

Processing files requires three \LaTeX{} passes in addition to the biber
command. A typical command line run may look like this:
\begin{code}
\begin{verbatim}
$ xelatex document.tex
$ biber document
$ xelatex document.tex
$ xelatex document.tex
\end{verbatim}
\end{code}
The first \LaTeX{} pass extracts the citation data from the document which are

> then read by \hologo{biber}. In the second pass, bibliography is placed in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then read by \hologo{biber}. In the second pass, the bibliography is placed in the
```

> document and the third one finally typesets the correct citations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
document and the third pass finally typesets the document with all the correct citations.
```

> After executing the procedure on the following file we may appreciate the
> result (in this and all the following examples, the \texttt{example.bib} file
> is assumed to be the same as in~\ref{fig:bibfile})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a complete example to show how the bits work together. Iin this and all the following examples, the \texttt{example.bib} file is assumed to be the same as in~\ref{fig:bibfile}.
```

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7cm,
  paperheight=9.9cm,
]
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry} %!hide
\usepackage{biblatex}
\addbibresource{example.bib}

\begin{document}
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt} %!hide
\ldots{} Recently I was
learning to use Bib\LaTeX{}
from~\cite{lshort}. It seems
very useful. \ldots

\ldots{} which was already
shown by Mrs.~Curie
in~\cite{curie}.
\ldots

\ldots{} this can be
easily explained by
the fact that Einstein
was a time
traveller~\cite{dream}.
\ldots

\printbibliography
\end{document}
\end{example}

\subsubsection{Controlling the bibliography}

The default sorting order is \emph{N}ame (author\slash editor), \emph{T}itle,
\emph{Y}ear or \carg{nty} in short. This order can be changed by passing

> \cargv{sorting=}\carg{order} as a package option. For example in order to order
> entries in chronological order we may pass \carg{ynt} option. Other options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\cargv{sorting=}\carg{order} as a package option. For example if you want to to sort
entries in chronological order simply pass the \carg{ynt} option. Other options
```

> include sorting by citation order (\carg{none}) and by the number of citations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow sorting by citation order (\carg{none}) and by the number of citations
```

(\carg{count}).
\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=6.5cm,
  paperheight=5.5cm,
]
\documentclass{article} %!hide
% In preamble
\usepackage[sorting=ynt]{biblatex}

% ...
%!hidebegin
\sloppy
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}

\begin{document}
\nocite{*}
\printbibliography[heading=none]
\end{document}
\end{example}

> While the default citation style is numeric, this can be easily changed by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the default citation style is \carg{numeric}, this can be easily changed by
```

> passing the preferred style to \carg{style} option. The default is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
setting the preferred style via the \carg{style} option. The default is
```

> \carg{numeric}, while alternatives include \carg{alphabetic},
> \carg{authoryear}, \carg{authortitle}, \carg{verbose}. Some styles come in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\carg{alphabetic},
\carg{authoryear}, \carg{authortitle} or \carg{verbose}. Some styles come in
```

several variations.
\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=6.5cm,
  paperheight=7.2cm,
]
\documentclass{article} %!hide
% In preamble
\usepackage[
  style=alphabetic
]{biblatex}

% ...

%!hidebegin
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy

\begin{document}
%!hideend
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt} %!hide
The validity of~\cite{dream} as a
scientific source was
recently called into question
though it correctly claims that
polonium was first described
in~\cite{curie}.
%!hidebegin
\printbibliography
\end{document}
\end{example}

> In contrast with \ei{thebibliography}, the \pai{biblatex}'s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast the \ei{thebibliography}, the \pai{biblatex}'s
```

\ci{printbibliography} command only prints entries that were referenced in the
document. If you want to print entries not mentioned in the document, you may

> use \ci{nocite}[marker] command. It will insert invisible citations thus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use the \ci{nocite}[marker] command. It will insert invisible citations thus
```

> instructing \pai{biblatex} to put them in the bibliography. Special value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instructing \pai{biblatex} to put them in the bibliography. The special value
```

> \cargv{*} can be passed as a \carg{marker} if we want to print all entries in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\cargv{*} can be passed as a \carg{marker} if you want to print all entries in
```

the database.
\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7cm,
  paperheight=7cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article} %!hide
\usepackage{biblatex}
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\begin{document}
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
%!hideend
I've only cited~\cite{lshort}.

\nocite{*}
\printbibliography
%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

If your bibliography gets really large it may make sense to split it into

> several ones. This can be done by passing filter options to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several parts. This can be done by passing filter options to
```

\ci{printbibliography} command. Available filters include \cargv{type},
\cargv{category}, \cargv{keyword}. It may be useful to also change the titles of
different categories using \cargv{title} option.

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7cm,
  paperheight=6cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article} %!hide
\usepackage{biblatex}
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\begin{document}
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\nocite{*}
%!hideend
\printbibliography[
  type=book,
  title=Books I've referenced
]

\printbibliography[
  keyword=unreliable,
  title=Don't trust those
]
%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

By default the bibliography does not appear in the table of contents. This is
because it is using starred version of \ci{chapter}\slash\ci{section}

> (depending on class) to generate its heading. In order to change the default we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(depending on the class) to generate its heading. In order to change the default we
```

  \item[\cargv{bibintoc}] starred version of heading, will appear in table of contents
  \item[\cargv{subbibliography}] will drop the bibliography one level in
  hierarchy (\ci{section*} instead of \ci{chapter*} and so on)
  \item[\cargv{bibnumbered}] will use non starred version for heading, thus
  numbering it and appearing in table of contents
  \item[\cargv{subbibintoc}] will drop the bibliography one level and put it in
  table of contents
  \item[\cargv{subbibnumbered}] will drop the bibliography one level and use
  non starred version of heading
  \item[\cargv{none}] will not print the heading
\end{description}

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7.6cm,
  paperheight=7.5cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article} %!hide
\usepackage{biblatex}
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\begin{document}
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\nocite{curie}
%!hideend
\tableofcontents
\section{Important section}

% ...

\section{Other}

\printbibliography[
  heading=subbibnumbered,
  title=Bibliography
]

% ...

%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

> As you may have noticed when the entries have many authors, then not all of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you may have noticed, when entries have many authors, then not all of
```

> them will be printed; instead of them ``et al.'' will be printed. This behavior

Reviewer: ```suggestion
them will be printed; instead ``et al.'' shows up at the end of the author list. This behavior
```

may be controlled via \cargv{maxnames} (default $3$) and \cargv{minnames}
(default $1$) options. If the number of names is greater than \carg{maxnames}
then it will be shortened to \carg{minnames} and ``et al.'' will be added.

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7cm,
  paperheight=3cm,
]
\documentclass{article} %!hide
\usepackage[maxnames=4]{biblatex}
%!hidebegin
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
\nocite{lshort}
\printbibliography[heading=none]

\end{document}
\end{example}

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=7cm,
  paperheight=3cm,
]
\documentclass{article} %!hide
\usepackage[minnames=2]{biblatex}
%!hidebegin
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
\nocite{lshort}
\printbibliography[heading=none]

\end{document}
\end{example}

\subsubsection{Citing commands}

Until now we have only used the basic \ci{cite} command. \pai{biblatex} extends

> the command set thus allowing us to be much more expressive when it comes to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the command set to allow extra control with
```

citations.

> Most of the citing commands (\ci{cite} included) allows us to insert notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the citing commands (\ci{cite} included) allows to insert notes
```

around the citations:
\begin{lscommand}
  \ci*{cite}[pre:o ! post:o ! marker:m]
\end{lscommand}
Other standard citation commands include \ci{parencite} (citation in
parentheses), \ci{footcite} (in footnotes), \ci{textcite} (citation intended to
be subject in a sentence), \ci{smartcite} (context dependent).

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=5cm,
  paperheight=5cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage[style=alphabetic]{biblatex}
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
%!hideend
Indicate page in citation~\cite[25]{lshort}. 
This citation is in
parentheses~\parencite{curie}.
Footnote cite~\footcite{dream}.
Smart \smartcite[See][78]{lshort}.
Again\footnote{Smart
\smartcite[12--56]{dream}.}.
``\Textcite{curie} was an important paper.''
%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

> Another set of commands allows us to extract a given information from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another set of commands allows us to extract specific information from
```

> bibliographic entry. This is includes commands such as \ci{citeauthor},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bibliographic entry, and use the information directly in the text. This is includes commands such as \ci{citeauthor},
```

\ci{citetitle}, \ci{citeyear}, \ci{citedate}, \ci{citeurl}.

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=5cm,
  paperheight=4cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{biblatex}
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
\noindent
%!hideend
\Citetitle{lshort} is a book by
\citeauthor{lshort}. Latest version was
released in \citeyear{lshort}, or to
be more precise on \citedate{lshort}. It
is available at \citeurl{lshort}.
%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

> If we want to be less tied to a specific style, there also exist \ci{autocite}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to be less tied to a specific style, the \ci{autocite}
```

> command which allows us to specify citation style in package options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command follows the citation style specified in the package options.
```

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=5cm,
  paperheight=4cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article}
%!hideend
\usepackage[
  style=verbose,
  autocite=footnote,
]{biblatex}

% ...

%!hidebegin
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
\noindent
%!hideend
This is auto citation \autocite{curie}.
%!hidebegin
\end{document}
\end{example}

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  biber_dir=../src/examples/,
  paperwidth=5cm,
  paperheight=2cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article}
%!hideend
\usepackage[
  style=authoryear,
  autocite=inline,
]{biblatex}

% ...
%!hidebegin
\usepackage[paperheight=\height,paperwidth=\width,margin=0.3cm]{geometry}
\addbibresource{example.bib}
\sloppy
\begin{document}
\noindent
This is auto citation \autocite{curie}.
\end{document}
\end{example}

\subsubsection{More about entries}

> \hologo{biber} uses ``and'' as a separator in author entries. In order to prevent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\hologo{biber} uses ``and'' as a separator in author entries. To prevent
```

> this behavior you must enclose ``and'' in curly braces like so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this behavior, enclose ``and'' in curly brackets
```

\begin{verbatim}
@book{
  author = {Kruger {and} sons}
}
\end{verbatim}
The same trick may be useful when \hologo{biber} changes capitalization, even
though it shouldn't.

When writing about certain subject it often happens that the same author or
publishing company released several books. In order to reuse the information in

> the \eei{.bib} file, a special entry \cargv{xdata} is available. It may be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several entries in the \eei{.bib} file, a special entry \cargv{xdata} is available. It may be used
```

like this

\begin{example}[standalone,
  template=empty,
  biber,
  paperwidth=6cm,
  paperheight=7cm,
]
%!hidebegin
\documentclass{article}
\begin{filecontents}{example2.bib} 
%!hideend
@xdata{krugers,
  author    = {Kruger {and} sons},
  publisher = {Krugers Inc.},
  location  = {Paris}
}

@book{kru21,
  title = {Why is \LaTeX{} so hard?},
  year  = {2021},

>   xdata = {krugers}

Reviewer: does this 'override' ... what happens when the same field already exists ...
